President Donald Trump is reshaping the
US government from the inside out. And
even the Federal Reserve is a target.
>> Jerome, too late. They come too late,
pal. I think he's terrible.
>> Some very strong words coming from the
president.
>> Termination cannot come fast enough.
>> People can say whatever they want.
That's fine.
>> This is something different and I worry
about it.
>> The threats to Fed independence that
we're seeing right now are real and
they're significant.
>> They're under a white hot political
spotlight right now. overall pressure
campaign.
>> The president and I are both concerned
about the foundations of the Fed.
>> With the unprecedented attempt to
dismiss a sitting governor, Lisa Cook
sues Trump overmoved to oust her. And an
economic ally poised to fill another
vacancy.
>> If I'm confirmed to this role, I will
act independently.
>> An institution traditionally sheltered
from politics is having to navigate
unfamiliar waters. Names can change, but
I think the ultimate point is you're
really targeting the independence of the
central bank.
>> Everybody agrees that central bank
independence is critical.
>> Central bank independence, we have to
fight for it.
>> Fed independence is the crucial
underpinning of the Fed's credibility as
an inflation fighter. If Fed
independence is lost, that credibility
is shattered.
>> We're never going to be influenced by
any political pressure.
>> Oh, he'll leave. If I ask him to, he'll
be out of there.
>> One of the biggest challenges is dealing
with uncertainty. A central bank wants
to avoid contributing to that
uncertainty.
To truly appreciate the gravity of where
the US is today, here's a quick history
lesson. Back in the 1970s, President
Richard Nixon pressured the Fed chair
Arthur Burns into cutting interest rates
to boost his re-election prospects. I
respect his independence. However, I
hope that independently he will conclude
that my views are the ones that should
be followed.
>> Burns obliged. But what followed was
years of crippling inflation. Burns
successor Paul Vulker responded by
raising rates dramatically. Although
this caused a lot of pain, the inflation
dragon was tamed and it set the economy
back on track for growth. Vulkar's
resolve in the face of political
pressure also reestablished the notion
that a central bank removed from
politics was necessary and beneficial.
This autonomy has held ever since.
>> We will continue to maintain a strong
and independent Federal Reserve.
>> At least until now.
>> We have a a stupid person, frankly, at
the Fed. Always too late. A little slow.
>> Yeah, he's not a smart guy.
Judging how aggressive Trump has been
can be subjective, but Bloomberg
Economics developed a way of keeping
track.
>> What we wanted to do was take it out of
the realm of mere impression. My
assertion versus somebody else's
assertion. We wanted to give it a
quantitative grounding.
>> Headlines were scored for their positive
or negative sentiment on Fed
independence. Social media posts, if
associated with those headlines, were
counted as well. We added those up
across months in order to derive a
visual impression.
Through the first couple of years,
President Trump was relatively
restrained.
When Trump took office for the second
time, the intensity picked up right away
and has by far set new records.
Admittedly, that scoring is inherently
somewhat judgmental. somebody else could
perhaps arrive at a somewhat different
uh conclusion quantitatively, but the
existence of these headlines is
undeniable.
>> Somebody that I've never been very fond
of. Actually,
>> the irony here is it was President
Trump, after all, who nominated Jay
Powell to be chair of the Federal
Reserve.
>> Jay has the wisdom and leadership to
guide our economy.
Trump back in 2018 and 2019 was kicking
off a trade war with China and his firm
conviction was that the Fed needed to
play its part. Fast forward to where we
are today.
>> Interest rates have to come down.
>> We're in an even bigger trade war. Once
again, President Trump thinks the Fed
needs to get on board with Team USA and
deliver outsiz rate cuts to juice the
economy and give them a better shot of
winning in this trade war.
All politicians, if they're in power
already, would very much like to be in a
low interest rate economy with growth
booming. Growth can boom with low
interest rates because they inspire
businesses to hire and investors to
invest. Usually, high interest rates do
the opposite. When it's more expensive
to borrow, businesses can contract.
Managing this delicate balance is why
central banks exist and why their
independence to make nonpartisan
decisions has been so vigorously
defended.
>> The Fed's mandate is surprisingly clear.
Congress has instructed the Fed to
pursue maximum employment and price
stability. It doesn't mean that a
central bank that has solid independence
is a rogue organization utterly
unaccountable to elective
representatives. But there is this
buffer away from the political fray. It
is about shortsightedness versus
long-sightedness. Monetary policy here
historically in the United States and in
other countries around the globe has
been shown time and again to work better
when decision makers are allowed to make
decisions in the long-term interests of
the population.
>> This dynamic can be clearly seen in
Turkeykey's economic roller coaster.
President Erdogan's motions towards
including a lot more politics into
monetary policy started back in 2018. He
vowed to take a more active role in
policym and made it very apparent that
his preference lies with lower borrowing
costs. That culminated into the first
removal of the governor back in 2019
that has led to a series of departures
from the central bank. We're now on the
sixth central bank governor in just over
six years in Turkey.
That policy has led Turkish economy down
a quite difficult path. Trying to tackle
reign in price pressures by lowering
borrowing costs produced the opposite
result to what the president was
expecting. Inflation exploded to a high
of 85%.
This had profound effects on the Turkish
population.
>> Items that we consider necessities such
as food, shelter, housing, utilities,
and healthcare. These tend to be quite
fast at adopting to high price pressure.
It makes it more expensive to be poor
and it divides the wedge between the
halves and the have nots even wider.
Fast forward to 2023 after the
elections, the the president actually
did a complete overhaul with the policy
makers completely doing a U-turn on
those unsound policies.
>> As the central bank aggressively
increased borrowing costs, lo and
behold, inflation volatility slowed and
has gradually come under control.
>> But to this day, we still have extremely
high inflation.
Let's take it with a grain of salt
comparing the US economy with a smaller
economy like Turkey, but the mechanics
are still there.
>> Turkeykey's revolving door of central
bank governors is a cautionary tale. But
US presidents have historically observed
legal guard rails to remove Fed decision
makers.
>> Trump's attempt to oust Governor Lisa
Cook breaks that convention.
Congress in 1935 wrote in a requirement
that the president can dismiss members
of the board of governors for cause.
There has to be some serious form of
misbehavior.
>> Our independence is a matter of law.
>> Just how far President Trump can take
his arguments remains to be seen. The
Supreme Court in ruling on the
president's ability to fire the heads of
other independent agencies explicitly
created a carve out for the Fed,
suggesting that the legal bar for the
president to oust Jerome Powell is
fairly high. But the US Supreme Court
with many of its justices appointed by
Trump himself has often ruled in his
favor. Added to this, the firing of the
head of the Bureau of Labor Statistics
rang alarm bells around the integrity of
data that inform economic decisions.
>> There's a tradition to adhere strictly
to nonpartisan professional objective
standards in creating uh the data. Many
of us will be on high alert to be
extremely observant about any
possibility of manipulation of the data
for political purposes.
>> The stakes here couldn't be higher.
Markets risk losing faith that monetary
policy decisions will be made
apolitically no matter who works at the
Fed.
>> This is what we call credibility and
that's the thing that is very hardearned
and quite easily spent. the president
when whoever they choose, you're going
to have to have somebody that has
credibility with the markets or you're
going to see inflation expectations
spike. You will not get lower interest
rates. You will get higher interest
rates. Trump could be shooting himself
in the foot. A Fed that floods the US
economy with cheap money, will have to
pay more to convince the market to hold
US debt. Treasury yields, especially
anything past 2 years, will go up. And
it's these interest rates that matter
most to the economy. You should stop
fixating on what this means for rate
cuts. I think what is this going to do
for the longer end of the curve. I think
that's what the market's got to start
thinking about.
>> We haven't seen substantial reactions in
markets yet, but this could turn very
quickly. Frankly, I think we are playing
with fire.
>> With the full effect of Trump's tariffs
yet to be felt, the challenge to the
Fed's credibility as an inflation
fighter has come at a bad time.
The story of the rise of President Trump
and the rise of his MAGA base has really
been a story about attacks on elite
institutions.
Now Trump and his team, they're
hammering at the Fed's door. There's
going to be some pretty serious
consequences for the US economy and for
the US markets.
[Music]